
In history this series of the of universe lectures from I shall the try big to bang give an to outline black holes. of what In the we think first lecture is the 
I shall briefly review past ideas about the universe and how we got to our present picture. One might call this the history of the history of the universe. 
In the second lecture I shall describe how both Newton’s and Einstein’s the- ories of gravity led to the conclusion that the universe could not be static; it had to be either expanding or contracting. This, in turn, implied that there must have been a time between ten and twenty billion years ago when the density of the universe was infinite. This is called the big bang. It would have been the beginning of the universe. 
In the third lecture I shall talk about black holes. These are formed when a massive star or an even larger body collapses in on itself under its own gravitational pull. According to Einstein’s general theory of relativity, anyone foolish enough to fall into a black hole will be lost forever. They will not be able to come out of the black hole again. Instead, history, as far as they are concerned, will come to a sticky end at a singularity. However, general relativity is a classical theory—that is, it doesn't take into account the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics. 

In the fourth lecture I shall describe how quantum mechanics allows energy to leak out of black holes. Black holes aren’t as black as they are painted. 
In the fifth lecture I shall apply quantum mechanical ideas to the big bang and the origin of the universe. This leads to the idea that space–time may be finite in extent but without boundary or edge. It would be like the surface of the Earth but with two more dimensions. 
In the sixth lecture I shall show how this new boundary proposal could explain why the past is so different from the future, even though the laws of physics are time symmetric. 
Finally, in the seventh lecture I shall describe how we are trying to find a unified theory that will include quantum mechanics, gravity, and all the other interactions of physics. If we achieve this, we shall really understand the universe and our position in it. 

As put long forward ago as two 340 good B.C. arguments Aristotle, for in his believing book On that the the Heavens, Earth was was a able round to 
ball rather than a flat plate. First, he realized that eclipses of the moon were caused by the Earth coming between the sun and the moon. The Earth’s shad- ow on the moon was always round, which would be true only if the Earth was spherical. If the Earth had been a flat disk, the shadow would have been elon- gated and elliptical, unless the eclipse always occurred at a time when the sun was directly above the center of the disk. 
Second, the Greeks knew from their travels that the Pole Star appeared lower in the sky when viewed in the south than it did in more northerly regions. From the difference in the apparent position of the Pole Star in Egypt and Greece, Aristotle even quoted an estimate that the distance around the Earth was four hundred thousand stadia. It is not known exactly what length a sta- dium was, but it may have been about two hundred yards. This would make Aristotle’s estimate about twice the currently accepted figure. 
The Greeks even had a third argument that the Earth must be round, for why else does one first see the sails of a ship coming over the horizon and only later see the hull? Aristotle thought that the Earth was stationary and that the sun, the moon, the planets, and the stars moved in circular orbits about the Earth. He believed this because he felt, for mystical reasons, that the Earth was the center of the universe and that circular motion was the most perfect. 

This idea was elaborated by Ptolemy in the first century A.D. into a complete cosmological model. The Earth stood at the center, surrounded by eight spheres, which carried the moon, the sun, the stars, and the five planets known at the time: Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. The planets themselves moved on smaller circles attached to their respective spheres in order to account for their rather complicated observed paths in the sky. The outermost sphere carried the so–called fixed stars, which always stay in the same positions relative to each other but which rotate together across the sky. What lay beyond the last sphere was never made very clear, but it certainly was not part of mankind’s observable universe. 
Ptolemy’s model provided a reasonably accurate system for predicting the positions of heavenly bodies in the sky. But in order to predict these positions correctly, Ptolemy had to make an assumption that the moon followed a path that sometimes brought it twice as close to the Earth as at other times. And that meant that the moon had sometimes to appear twice as big as it usually does. Ptolemy was aware of this flaw but nevertheless his model was generally, although not universally, accepted. It was adopted by the Christian church as the picture of the universe that was in accordance with Scripture. It had the great advantage that it left lots of room outside the sphere of fixed stars for heaven and hell. 
A much simpler model, however, was proposed in 1514 by a Polish priest, Nicholas Copernicus. At first, for fear of being accused of heresy, Copernicus published his model anonymously. His idea was that the sun was stationary at the center and that the Earth and the planets moved in circular orbits around the sun. Sadly for Copernicus, nearly a century passed before this idea was to be taken seriously. Then two astronomers—the German, Johannes Kepler, and the Italian, Galileo Galilei—started publicly to support the Copernican theo- ry, despite the fact that the orbits it predicted did not quite match the ones observed. The death of the Aristotelian–Ptolemaic theory came in 1609. In that year Galileo started observing the night sky with a telescope, which had just been invented. 
When he looked at the planet Jupiter, Galileo found that it was accompa- nied by several small satellites, or moons, which orbited around it. This implied that everything did not have to orbit directly around the Earth as Aristotle and Ptolemy had thought. It was, of course, still possible to believe that the Earth was stationary at the center of the universe, but that the moons of Jupiter moved on extremely complicated paths around the Earth, giving the appearance that they orbited Jupiter. However, Copernicus’s theory was much simpler. 
At the same time, Kepler had modified Copernicus’s theory, suggesting that the planets moved not in circles, but in ellipses. The predictions now finally matched the observations. As far as Kepler was concerned, elliptical orbits were merely an ad hoc hypothesis—and a rather repugnant one at that because ellipses were clearly less perfect than circles. Having discovered, almost by acci- dent, that elliptical orbits fitted the observations well, he could not reconcile with his idea that the planets were made to orbit the sun by magnetic forces. 
An explanation was provided only much later, in 1687, when Newton pub- lished his Principia Mathematica Naturalis Causae. This was probably the most important single work ever published in the physical sciences. In it, Newton not only put forward a theory of how bodies moved in space and time, but he also developed the mathematics needed to analyze those motions. In addition, Newton postulated a law of universal gravitation. This said that each body in the universe was attracted toward every other body by a force which was stronger the more massive the bodies and the closer they were to each other. It was the same force which caused objects to fall to the ground. The story that Newton was hit on the head by an apple is almost certainly apocryphal. All Newton himself ever said was that the idea of gravity came to him as he sat in a contemplative mood, and was occasioned by the fall of an apple. 
Newton went on to show that, according to his law, gravity causes the moon to move in an elliptical orbit around the Earth and causes the Earth and the planets to follow elliptical paths around the sun. The Copernican model got rid of Ptolemy’s celestial spheres, and with them the idea that the universe had a natural boundary. The fixed stars did not appear to change their relative posi- tions as the Earth went around the sun. It therefore became natural to suppose that the fixed stars were objects like our sun but much farther away. This raised a problem. Newton realized that, according to his theory of gravity, the stars should attract each other; so, it seemed they could not remain essentially motionless. Would they not all fall together at some point? 
In a letter in 1691 to Richard Bentley, another leading thinker of his day, Newton argued that this would indeed happen if there were only a finite num- ber of stars. But he reasoned that if, on the other hand, there were an infinite number of stars distributed more or less uniformly over infinite space, this would not happen because there would not be any central point for them to fall to. This argument is an instance of the pitfalls that one can encounter when one talks about infinity. 
In an infinite universe, every point can be regarded as the center because every point has an infinite number of stars on each side of it. The correct approach, it was realized only much later, is to consider the finite situation in which the 

stars all fall in on each other. One then asks how things change if one adds more stars roughly uniformly distributed outside this region. According to Newton’s law, the extra stars would make no difference at all to the original ones, and so the stars would fall in just as fast. We can add as many stars as we like, but they will still always collapse in on themselves. We now know it is impossible to have an infinite static model of the universe in which gravity is always attractive. 
It is an interesting reflection on the general climate of thought before the twentieth century that no one had suggested that the universe was expanding or contracting. It was generally accepted that either the universe had existed forever in an unchanging state or that it had been created at a finite time in the past, more or less as we observe it today. In part, this may have been due to people’s tendency to believe in eternal truths as well as the comfort they found in the thought that even though they may grow old and die, the uni- verse is unchanging. 
Even those who realized that Newton’s theory of gravity showed that the uni- verse could not be static did not think to suggest that it might be expanding. Instead, they attempted to modify the theory by making the gravitational force repulsive at very large distances. This did not significantly affect their predic- tions of the motions of the planets. But it would allow an infinite distribution 
of stars to remain in equilibrium, with the attractive forces between nearby stars being balanced by the repulsive forces from those that were farther away. 
However, we now believe such an equilibrium would be unstable. If the stars in some region got only slightly near each other, the attractive forces between them would become stronger and would dominate over the repulsive forces. This would mean that the stars would continue to fall toward each other. On the other hand, if the stars got a bit farther away from each other, the repul- sive forces would dominate and drive them farther apart. 
Another objection to an infinite static universe is normally ascribed to the German philosopher Heinrich Olbers. In fact, various contemporaries of Newton had raised the problem, and the Olbers article of 1823 was not even the first to contain plausible arguments on this subject. It was, however, the first to be widely noted. The difficulty is that in an infinite static universe nearly every line or side would end on the surface of a star. Thus one would expect that the whole sky would be as bright as the sun, even at night. Olbers’s counterargument was that the light from distant stars would be dimmed by absorption by intervening matter. However, if that happened, the intervening matter would eventually heat up until it glowed as brightly as the stars. 
The only way of avoiding the conclusion that the whole of the night sky should be as bright as the surface of the sun would be if the stars had not been shining forever, but had turned on at some finite time in the past. In that case, the absorbing matter might not have heated up yet, or the light from distant stars might not yet have reached us. And that brings us to the question of what could have caused the stars to have turned on in the first place. 
The beginning of the universe had, of course, been discussed for a long time. According to a number of early cosmologies in the Jewish/Christian/Muslim tradition, the universe started at a finite and not very distant time in the past. One argument for such a beginning was the feeling that it was necessary to have a first cause to explain the existence of the universe. 
Another argument was put forward by St. Augustine in his book, The City of God. He pointed out that civilization is progressing, and we remember who performed this deed or developed that technique. Thus man, and so also per- haps the universe, could not have been around all that long. For otherwise we would have already progressed more than we have. 

St. Augustine accepted a date of about 5000 B.C. for the creation of the uni- verse according to the book of Genesis. It is interesting that this is not so far from the end of the last Ice Age, about 10,000 B.C., which is when civilization really began. Aristotle and most of the other Greek philosophers, on the other hand, did not like the idea of a creation because it made too much of divine intervention. They believed, therefore, that the human race and the world around it had existed, and would exist, forever. They had already considered the argument about progress, described earlier, and answered it by saying that there had been periodic floods or other disasters that repeatedly set the human race right back to the beginning of civilization. 
When most people believed in an essentially static and unchanging universe, the question of whether or not it had a beginning was really one of meta- physics or theology. One could account for what was observed either way. Either the universe had existed forever, or it was set in motion at some finite time in such a manner as to look as though it had existed forever. But in 1929, Edwin Hubble made the landmark observation that wherever you look, distant stars are moving rapidly away from us. In other words, the universe is expand- ing. This means that at earlier times objects would have been closer together. In fact, it seemed that there was a time about ten or twenty thousand million years ago when they were all at exactly the same place. 
This discovery finally brought the question of the beginning of the universe into the realm of science. Hubble's observations suggested that there was a time called the big bang when the universe was infinitesimally small and, therefore, infinitely dense. If there were events earlier than this time, then they could not affect what happens at the present time. Their existence can be ignored because it would have no observational consequences. 
One may say that time had a beginning at the big bang, in the sense that ear- lier times simply could not be defined. It should be emphasized that this begin- ning in time is very different from those that had been considered previously. In an unchanging universe, a beginning in time is something that has to be imposed by some being outside the universe. There is no physical necessity for a beginning. One can imagine that God created the universe at literally any time in the past. On the other hand, if the universe is expanding, there may be physical reasons why there had to be a beginning. One could still believe that God created the universe at the instant of the big bang. He could even have created it at a later time in just such a way as to make it look as though there had been a big bang. But it would be meaningless to suppose that it was created before the big bang. An expanding universe does not preclude a cre- ator, but it does place limits on when He might have carried out his job. 

Our the sun Milky and Way the nearby galaxy. stars For are a long all part time of it a was vast thought collection that of this stars was called the whole universe. It was only in 1924 that the American astronomer Edwin Hubble demonstrated that ours was not the only galaxy. There were, in fact, many others, with vast tracks of empty space between them. In order to prove this he needed to determine the distances to these other galaxies. We can determine the distance of nearby stars by observing how they change position as the Earth goes around the sun. But other galaxies are so far away that, unlike nearby stars, they really do appear fixed. Hubble was forced, therefore, to use indirect methods to measure the distances. 
Now the apparent brightness of a star depends on two factors—luminosity and how far it is from us. For nearby stars we can measure both their apparent brightness and their distance, so we can work out their luminosity. Conversely, if we knew the luminosity of stars in other galaxies, we could work out their distance by measuring their apparent brightness. Hubble argued that there were certain types of stars that always had the same luminosity when they were near enough for us to measure. If, therefore, we found such stars in another galaxy, we could assume that they had the same luminosity. Thus, we could calculate the distance to that galaxy. If we could do this for a number of stars in the same galaxy, and our calculations always gave the same distance, we could be fairly confident of our estimate. In this way, Edwin Hubble worked out the distances to nine different galaxies. 

We now know that our galaxy is only one of some hundred thousand million that can be seen using modern telescopes, each galaxy itself containing some hundred thousand million stars. We live in a galaxy that is about one hundred thousand light-years across and is slowly rotating; the stars in its spiral arms orbit around its center about once every hundred million years. Our sun is just an ordinary, average-sized, yellow star, near the outer edge of one of the spiral arms. We have certainly come a long way since Aristotle and Ptolemy, when we thought that the Earth was the center of the universe. 
Stars are so far away that they appear to us to be just pinpoints of light. We cannot determine their size or shape. So how can we tell different types of stars apart? For the vast majority of stars, there is only one correct characteristic feature that we can observe—the color of their light. Newton discovered that if light from the sun passes through a prism, it breaks up into its component colors—its spectrum—like in a rainbow. By focusing a telescope on an individual star or galaxy, one can similarly observe the spectrum of the light from that star or galaxy. Different stars have different spectra, but the relative brightness of the different colors is always exactly what one would expect to find in the light emitted by an object that is glowing red hot. This means that we can tell a star's temperature from the spectrum of its light. Moreover, we find that certain very specific colors are missing from stars’ spectra, and these missing colors may vary from star to star. We know that each chemical element 
absorbs the characteristic set of very specific colors. Thus, by matching each of those which are missing from a star’s spectrum, we can determine exactly which elements are present in the star’s atmosphere. 
In the 1920s, when astronomers began to look at the spectra of stars in other galaxies, they found something most peculiar: There were the same character- istic sets of missing colors as for stars in our own galaxy, but they were all shifted by the same relative amount toward the red end of the spectrum. The only reasonable explanation of this was that the galaxies were moving away from us, and the frequency of the light waves from them was being reduced, or red-shifted, by the Doppler effect. Listen to a car passing on the road. As the car is approaching, its engine sounds at a higher pitch, corresponding to a higher frequency of sound waves; and when it passes and goes away, it sounds at a lower pitch. The behavior of light or radial waves is similar. Indeed, the police made use of the Doppler effect to measure the speed of cars by measur- ing the frequency of pulses of radio waves reflected off them. 
In the years following his proof of the existence of other galaxies, Hubble spent his time cataloging their distances and observing their spectra. At that time most people expected the galaxies to be moving around quite randomly, and so expected to find as many spectra which were blue-shifted as ones which were red–shifted. It was quite a surprise, therefore, to find that the galaxies all 

appeared red-shifted. Every single one was moving away from us. More surpris- ing still was the result which Hubble published in 1929: Even the size of the galaxy's red shift was not random, but was directly proportional to the galaxy's distance from us. Or, in other words, the farther a galaxy was, the faster it was moving away. And that meant that the universe could not be static, as every- one previously thought, but was in fact expanding. The distance between the different galaxies was growing all the time. 
The discovery that the universe was expanding was one of the great intellec- tual revolutions of the twentieth century. With hindsight, it is easy to wonder why no one had thought of it before. Newton and others should have realized that a static universe would soon start to contract under the influence of gravity. But suppose that, instead of being static, the universe was expanding. If it was expanding fairly slowly, the force of gravity would cause it eventually to stop expanding and then to start contracting. However, if it was expanding at more than a certain critical rate, gravity would never be strong enough to stop it, and the universe would continue to expand forever. This is a bit like what happens when one fires a rocket upward from the surface of the Earth. If it has a fairly low speed, gravity will eventually stop the rocket and it will start falling back. On the other hand, if the rocket has more than a certain critical speed–about seven miles a second–gravity will not be strong enough to pull it back, so it will keep going away from the Earth forever. 
This behavior of the universe could have been predicted from Newton’s theory of gravity at any time in the nineteenth, the eighteenth, or even the late sev- enteenth centuries. Yet so strong was the belief in a static universe that it per- sisted into the early twentieth century. Even when Einstein formulated the general theory of relativity in 1915, he was sure that the universe had to be static. He therefore modified his theory to make this possible, introducing a so- called cosmological constant into his equations. This was a new “antigravity” force, which, unlike other forces, did not come from any particular source, but was built into the very fabric of space-time. His cosmological constant gave space-time an inbuilt tendency to expand, and this could be made to exactly balance the attraction of all the matter in the universe so that a static universe would result. 
Only one man, it seems, was willing to take general relativity at face value. While Einstein and other physicists were looking for ways of avoiding general relativity’s prediction of a nonstatic universe, the Russian physicist Alexander Friedmann instead set about explaining it. 
The equations of general relativity, which determined how the universe evolves in time, are too complicated to solve in detail. So what Friedmann 

did, instead, was to make two very simple assumptions about the universe: that the universe looks identical in whichever direction we look, and that this would also be true if we were observing the universe from anywhere else. On the basis of general relativity and these two assumptions, Friedmann showed that we should not expect the universe to be static. In fact, in 1922, several years before Edwin Hubble's discovery, Friedmann predicted exactly what Hubble found. 
The assumption that the universe looks the same in every direction is clearly not true in reality. For example, the other stars in our galaxy form a distinct band of light across the night sky called the Milky Way. But if we look at distant galax- ies, there seems to be more or less the same number of them in each direction. So the universe does seem to be roughly the same in every direction, provided one views it on a large scale compared to the distance between galaxies. 
For a long time this was sufficient justification for Friedmann’s assumption— as a rough approximation to the real universe. But more recently a lucky acci- dent uncovered the fact that Friedmann’s assumption is in fact a remarkably accurate description of our universe. In 1965, two American physicists, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, were working at the Bell Labs in New Jersey on the design of a very sensitive microwave detector for communicating with orbiting satellites. They were worried when they found that their detector was 
picking up more noise than it ought to, and that the noise did not appear to be coming from any particular direction. First they looked for bird droppings on their detector and checked for other possible malfunctions, but soon ruled these out. They knew that any noise from within the atmosphere would be stronger when the detector is not pointing straight up than when it is, because the atmosphere appears thicker when looking at an angle to the vertical. 
The extra noise was the same whichever direction the detector pointed, so it must have come from outside the atmosphere. It was also the same day and night throughout the year, even though the Earth was rotating on its axis and orbiting around the sun. This showed that the radiation must come from beyond the solar system, and even from beyond the galaxy, as otherwise it would vary as the Earth pointed the detector in different directions. 
In fact, we know that the radiation must have traveled to us across most of the observable universe. Since it appears to be the same in different direc- tions, the universe must also be the same in every direction, at least on a large scale. We now know that whichever direction we look in, this noise never varies by more than one part in ten thousand. So Penzias and Wilson had unwittingly stumbled across a remarkably accurate confirmation of Friedmann’s first assumption. 

At roughly the same time, two American physicists at nearby Princeton University, Bob Dicke and Jim Peebles, were also taking an interest in microwaves. They were working on a suggestion made by George Gamow, once a student of Alexander Friedmann, that the early universe should have been very hot and dense, glowing white hot. Dicke and Peebles argued that we should still be able to see this glowing, because light from very distant parts of the early universe would only just be reaching us now. However, the expansion of the universe meant that this light should be so greatly red-shift- ed that it would appear to us now as microwave radiation. Dicke and Peebles were looking for this radiation when Penzias and Wilson heard about their work and realized that they had already found it. For this, Penzias and Wilson were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1978, which seems a bit hard on Dicke and Peebles. 
Now at first sight, all this evidence that the universe looks the same whichev- er direction we look in might seem to suggest there is something special about our place in the universe. In particular, it might seem that if we observe all other galaxies to be moving away from us, then we must be at the center of the universe. There is, however, an alternative explanation: The universe might also look the same in every direction as seen from any other galaxy. This, as we have seen, was Friedmann’s second assumption. 
We have no scientific evidence for or against this assumption. We believe it only on grounds of modesty. It would be most remarkable if the universe looked the same in every direction around us, but not around other points in the universe. In Friedmann’s model, all the galaxies are moving directly away from each other. The situation is rather like steadily blowing up a balloon which has a number of spots painted on it. As the balloon expands, the dis- tance between any two spots increases, but there is no spot that can be said to be the center of the expansion. Moreover, the farther apart the spots are, the faster they will be moving apart. Similarly, in Friedmann’s model the speed at which any two galaxies are moving apart is proportional to the distance between them. So it predicted that the red shift of a galaxy should be directly proportional to its distance from us, exactly as Hubble found. 
Despite the success of his model and his prediction of Hubble’s observations, Friedmann’s work remained largely unknown in the West. It became known only after similar models were discovered in 1935 by the American physicist Howard Robertson and the British mathematician Arthur Walker, in response to Hubble’s discovery of the uniform expansion of the universe. 
Although Friedmann found only one, there are in fact three different kinds of models that obey Friedmann’s two fundamental assumptions. In the first kind—which Friedmann found—the universe is expanding so sufficiently 

slowly that the gravitational attraction between the different galaxies causes the expansion to slow down and eventually to stop. The galaxies then start to move toward each other and the universe contracts. The distance between two neighboring galaxies starts at zero, increases to a maximum, and then decreases back down to zero again. 
In the second kind of solution, the universe is expanding so rapidly that the gravitational attraction can never stop it, though it does slow it down a bit. The separation between neighboring galaxies in this model starts at zero, and eventually the galaxies are moving apart at a steady speed. 
Finally, there is a third kind of solution, in which the universe is expanding only just fast enough to avoid recollapse. In this case the separation also starts at zero, and increases forever. However, the speed at which the galaxies are moving apart gets smaller and smaller, although it never quite reaches zero. 
A remarkable feature of the first kind of Friedmann model is that the universe is not infinite in space, but neither does space have any boundary. Gravity is so strong that space is bent round onto itself, making it rather like the surface of the Earth. If one keeps traveling in a certain direction on the surface of the Earth, one never comes up against an impassable barrier or falls over the edge, but eventually comes back to where one started. Space, in the first Friedmann 
model, is just like this, but with three dimensions instead of two for the Earth’s surface. The fourth dimension—time—is also finite in extent, but it is like a line with two ends or boundaries, a beginning and an end. We shall see later that when one combines general relativity with the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, it is possible for both space and time to be finite without any edges or boundaries. The idea that one could go right around the universe and end up where one started makes good science fiction, but it doesn't have much practical significance because it can be shown that the universe would recollapse to zero size before one could get round. You would need to travel faster than light in order to end up where you started before the universe came to an end—and that is not allowed. 
But which Friedmann model describes our universe? Will the universe eventu- ally stop expanding and start contracting, or will it expand forever? To answer this question we need to know the present rate of expansion of the universe and its present average density. If the density is less than a certain critical value, determined by the rate of expansion, the gravitational attraction will be too weak to halt the expansion. If the density is greater than the critical value, gravity will stop the expansion at some time in the future and cause the universe to recollapse. 
We can determine the present rate of expansion by measuring the velocities at which other galaxies are moving away from us, using the Doppler effect. This 

can be done very accurately. However, the distances to the galaxies are not very well known because we can only measure them indirectly. So all we know is that the universe is expanding by between 5 percent and 10 percent every thousand million years. However, our uncertainty about the present average density of the universe is even greater. 
If we add up the masses of all the stars that we can see in our galaxy and other galaxies, the total is less than one-hundredth of the amount required to halt the expansion of the universe, even in the lowest estimate of the rate of expan- sion. But we know that our galaxy and other galaxies must contain a large amount of dark matter which we cannot see directly, but which we know must be there because of the influence of its gravitational attraction on the orbits of stars and gas in the galaxies. Moreover, most galaxies are found in clusters, and we can similarly infer the presence of yet more dark matter in between the galaxies in these clusters by its effect on the motion of the galaxies. When we add up all this dark matter, we still get only about one-tenth of the amount required to halt the expansion. However, there might be some other form of matter which we have not yet detected and which might still raise the average density of the universe up to the critical value needed to halt the expansion. 
The present evidence, therefore, suggests that the universe will probably expand forever. But don’t bank on it. All we can really be sure of is that even 
if the universe is going to recollapse, it won’t do so for at least another ten thousand million years, since it has already been expanding for at least that long. This should not unduly worry us since by that time, unless we have colonies beyond the solar system, mankind will long since have died out, extinguished along with the death of our sun. 
All of the Friedmann solutions have the feature that at some time in the past, between ten and twenty thousand million years ago, the distance between neighboring galaxies must have been zero. At that time, which we call the big bang, the density of the universe and the curvature of space-time would have been infinite. This means that the general theory of relativity— on which Friedmann’s solutions are based—predicts that there is a singular point in the universe. 
All our theories of science are formulated on the assumption that space–time is smooth and nearly flat, so they would all break down at the big bang singu- larity, where the curvature of space–time is infinite. This means that even if there were events before the big bang, one could not use them to determine what would happen afterward, because predictability would break down at the big bang. Correspondingly, if we know only what has happened since the big 
 
bang, we could not determine what happened beforehand. As far as we are concerned, events before the big bang can have no consequences, so they should not form part of a scientific model of the universe. We should therefore cut them out of the model and say that time had a beginning at the big bang. 
Many people do not like the idea that time has a beginning, probably because it smacks of divine intervention. (The Catholic church, on the other hand, had seized on the big bang model and in 1951 officially pronounced it to be in accordance with the Bible.) There were a number of attempts to avoid the con- clusion that there had been a big bang. The proposal that gained widest support was called the steady state theory. It was suggested in 1948 by two refugees from Nazi–occupied Austria, Hermann Bondi and Thomas Gold, together with the Briton Fred Hoyle, who had worked with them on the development of radar during the war. The idea was that as the galaxies moved away from each other, new galaxies were continually forming in the gaps in between, from new matter that was being continually created. The universe would therefore look roughly the same at all times as well as at all points of space. 
The steady state theory required a modification of general relativity to allow for the continual creation of matter, but the rate that was involved was so low—about one particle per cubic kilometer per year—that it was not in con- flict with experiment. The theory was a good scientific theory, in the sense 
that it was simple and it made definite predictions that could be tested by observation. One of these predictions was that the number of galaxies or sim- ilar objects in any given volume of space should be the same wherever and whenever we look in the universe. 
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, a survey of sources of radio waves from outer space was carried out at Cambridge by a group of astronomers led by Martin Ryle. The Cambridge group showed that most of these radio sources must lie outside our galaxy, and also that there were many more weak sources than strong ones. They interpreted the weak sources as being the more distant ones, and the stronger ones as being near. Then there appeared to be fewer sources per unit volume of space for the nearby sources than for the distant ones. 
This could have meant that we were at the center of a great region in the uni- verse in which the sources were fewer than elsewhere. Alternatively, it could have meant that the sources were more numerous in the past, at the time that the radio waves left on their journey to us, than they are now. Either explana- tion contradicted the predictions of the steady state theory. Moreover, the discovery of the microwave radiation by Penzias and Wilson in 1965 also indi- cated that the universe must have been much denser in the past. The steady state theory therefore had regretfully to be abandoned. 

Another attempt to avoid the conclusion that there must have been a big bang and, therefore, a beginning of time, was made by two Russian scientists, Evgenii Lifshitz and Isaac Khalatnikov, in 1963. They suggested that the big bang might be a peculiarity of Friedmann’s models alone, which after all were only approximations to the real universe. Perhaps, of all the models that were roughly like the real universe, only Friedmann’s would contain a big bang sin- gularity. In Friedmann’s models, the galaxies are all moving directly away from each other. So it is not surprising that at some time in the past they were all at the same place. In the real universe, however, the galaxies are not just moving directly away from each other—they also have small sideways velocities. So in reality they need never have been all at exactly the same place, only very close together. Perhaps, then, the current expanding universe resulted not from a big bang singularity, but from an earlier contracting phase; as the universe had col- lapsed, the particles in it might not have all collided, but they might have flown past and then away from each other, producing the present expansion of the universe. How then could we tell whether the real universe should have started out with a big bang? 
What Lifshitz and Khalatnikov did was to study models of the universe which were roughly like Friedmann’s models but which took account of the irregular- ities and random velocities of galaxies in the real universe. They showed that such models could start with a big bang, even though the galaxies were no 
longer always moving directly away from each other. But they claimed that this was still only possible in certain exceptional models in which the galaxies were all moving in just the right way. They argued that since there seemed to be infinitely more Friedmann-like models without a big bang singularity than there were with one, we should conclude that it was very unlikely that there had been a big bang. They later realized, however, that there was a much more general class of Friedmann-like models which did have singularities, and in which the galaxies did not have to be moving in any special way. They there- fore withdrew their claim in 1970. 
The work of Lifshitz and Khalatnikov was valuable because it showed that the universe could have had a singularity—a big bang—if the general theory of rel- ativity was correct. However, it did not resolve the crucial question: Does gen- eral relativity predict that our universe should have the big bang, a beginning of time? The answer to this came out of a completely different approach start- ed by a British physicist, Roger Penrose, in 1965. He used the way light cones behave in general relativity, and the fact that gravity is always attractive, to show that a star that collapses under its own gravity is trapped in a region whose boundary eventually shrinks to zero size. This means that all the matter in the star will be compressed into a region of zero volume, so the density of matter and the curvature of space-time become infinite. In other words, one has a sin- gularity contained within a region of space-time known as a black hole. 

At first sight, Penrose’s result didn’t have anything to say about the question of whether there was a big bang singularity in the past. However, at the time that Penrose produced his theorem, I was a research student desperately look- ing for a problem with which to complete my Ph.D. thesis. I realized that if one reversed the direction of time in Penrose’s theorem so that the collapse became an expansion, the conditions of his theorem would still hold, provided the universe were roughly like a Friedmann model on large scales at the present time. Penrose’s theorem had shown that any collapsing star must end in a singularity; the time-reversed argument showed that any Friedmann-like expanding universe must have begun with a singularity. For technical reasons, Penrose’s theorem required that the universe be infinite in space. So I could use it to prove that there should be a singularity only if the universe was expanding fast enough to avoid collapsing again, because only that Friedmann model was infinite in space. 
During the next few years I developed new mathematical techniques to remove this and other technical conditions from the theorems that proved that singularities must occur. The final result was a joint paper by Penrose and myself in 1970, which proved that there must have been a big bang singu- larity provided only that general relativity is correct and that the universe contains as much matter as we observe. 
THE EXPANDING UNIVERSE 
There was a lot of opposition to our work, partly from the Russians, who followed the party line laid down by Lifshitz and Khalatnikov, and partly from people who felt that the whole idea of singularities was repugnant and spoiled the beauty of Einstein’s theory. However, one cannot really argue with the mathematical theorem. So it is now generally accepted that the universe must have a beginning. 

The American term black scientist hole is John of very Wheeler recent as origin. a graphic It was description coined in of 1969 an idea by that the 
goes back at least two hundred years. At that time there were two theories about light. One was that it was composed of particles; the other was that it was made of waves. We now know that really both theories are correct. By the wave/particle duality of quantum mechanics, light can be regarded as both a wave and a particle. Under the theory that light was made up of waves, it was not clear how it would respond to gravity. But if light were composed of parti- cles, one might expect them to be affected by gravity in the same way that cannonballs, rockets, and planets are. 
On this assumption, a Cambridge don, John Michell, wrote a paper in 1783 in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. In it, he point- ed out that a star that was sufficiently massive and compact would have such a strong gravitational field that light could not escape. Any light emitted from the surface of the star would be dragged back by the star's gravitational attraction before it could get very far. Michell suggested that there might be a large number of stars like this. Although we would not be able to see them because the light from them would not reach us, we would still feel their grav- itational attraction. Such objects are what we now call black holes, because that is what they are—black voids in space. 

A similar suggestion was made a few years later by the French scientist the Marquis de Laplace, apparently independently of Michell. Interestingly enough, he included it in only the first and second editions of his book, The System of the World, and left it out of later editions; perhaps he decided that it was a crazy idea. In fact, it is not really consistent to treat light like cannon- balls in Newton's theory of gravity because the speed of light is fixed. A can- nonball fired upward from the Earth will be slowed down by gravity and will eventually stop and fall back. A photon, however, must continue upward at a constant speed. How, then, can Newtonian gravity affect light? A consistent theory of how gravity affects light did not come until Einstein proposed gen- eral relativity in 1915; and even then it was a long time before the implica- tions of the theory for massive stars were worked out. 
To understand how a black hole might be formed, we first need an understand- ing of the life cycle of a star. A star is formed when a large amount of gas, most- ly hydrogen, starts to collapse in on itself due to its gravitational attraction. As it contracts, the atoms of the gas collide with each other more and more fre- quently and at greater and greater speeds—the gas heats up. Eventually the gas will be so hot that when the hydrogen atoms collide they no longer bounce off each other but instead merge with each other to form helium atoms. The heat released in this reaction, which is like a controlled hydrogen bomb, is what makes the stars shine. This additional heat also increases the pressure of the 
gas until it is sufficient to balance the gravitational attraction, and the gas stops contracting. It is a bit like a balloon where there is a balance between the pressure of the air inside, which is trying to make the balloon expand, and the tension in the rubber, which is trying to make the balloon smaller. 
The stars will remain stable like this for a long time, with the heat from the nuclear reactions balancing the gravitational attraction. Eventually, however, the star will run out of its hydrogen and other nuclear fuels. And paradoxical- ly, the more fuel a star starts off with, the sooner it runs out. This is because the more massive the star is, the hotter it needs to be to balance its gravita- tional attraction. And the hotter it is, the faster it will use up its fuel. Our sun has probably got enough fuel for another five thousand million years or so, but more massive stars can use up their fuel in as little as one hundred million years, much less than the age of the universe. When the star runs out of fuel, it will start to cool off and so to contract. What might happen to it then was only first understood at the end of the 1920s. 
In 1928 an Indian graduate student named Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar set sail for England to study at Cambridge with the British astronomer Sir Arthur Eddington. Eddington was an expert on general relativity. There is a story that a journalist told Eddington in the early 1920s that he had heard there were 

only three people in the world who understood general relativity. Eddington replied, “I am trying to think who the third person is.” 
During his voyage from India, Chandrasekhar worked out how big a star could be and still separate itself against its own gravity after it had used up all its fuel. The idea was this: When the star becomes small, the matter particles get very near each other. But the Pauli exclusion principle says that two matter particles cannot have both the same position and the same velocity. The mat- ter particles must therefore have very different velocities. This makes them move away from each other, and so tends to make the star expand. A star can therefore maintain itself at a constant radius by a balance between the attrac- tion of gravity and the repulsion that arises from the exclusion principle, just as earlier in its life the gravity was balanced by the heat. 
Chandrasekhar realized, however, that there is a limit to the repulsion that the exclusion principle can provide. The theory of relativity limits the maximum difference in the velocities of the matter particles in the star to the speed of light. This meant that when the star got sufficiently dense, the repulsion caused by the exclusion principle would be less than the attraction of gravity. Chandrasekhar calculated that a cold star of more than about one and a half times the mass of the sun would not be able to support itself against its own gravity. This mass is now known as the Chandrasekhar limit. 
This had serious implications for the ultimate fate of massive stars. If a star's mass is less than the Chandrasekhar limit, it can eventually stop contracting and settle down to a possible final state as a white dwarf with a radius of a few thousand miles and a density of hundreds of tons per cubic inch. A white dwarf is supported by the exclusion principle repulsion between the electrons in its matter. We observe a large number of these white dwarf stars. One of the first to be discovered is the star that is orbiting around Sirius, the brightest star in the night sky. 
It was also realized that there was another possible final state for a star also with a limiting mass of about one or two times the mass of the sun, but much smaller than even the white dwarf. These stars would be supported by the exclusion principle repulsion between the neutrons and protons, rather than between the electrons. They were therefore called neutron stars. They would have had a radius of only ten miles or so and a density of hundreds of millions of tons per cubic inch. At the time they were first predicted, there was no way that neutron stars could have been observed, and they were not detected until much later. 
Stars with masses above the Chandrasekhar limit, on the other hand, have a big problem when they come to the end of their fuel. In some cases they may explode or manage to throw off enough matter to reduce their mass below the 

limit, but it was difficult to believe that this always happened, no matter how big the star. How would it know that it had to lose weight? And even if every star managed to lose enough mass, what would happen if you added more mass to a white dwarf or neutron star to take it over the limit? Would it collapse to infinite density? 
Eddington was shocked by the implications of this and refused to believe Chandrasekhar's result. He thought it was simply not possible that a star could collapse to a point. This was the view of most scientists. Einstein himself wrote a paper in which he claimed that stars would not shrink to zero size.The hos- tility of other scientists, particularly of Eddington, his former teacher and the leading authority on the structure of stars, persuaded Chandrasekhar to aban- don this line of work and turn instead to other problems in astronomy. However, when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1983, it was, at least in part, for his early work on the limiting mass of cold stars. 
Chandrasekhar had shown that the exclusion principle could not halt the col- lapse of a star more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit. But the problem of understanding what would happen to such a star, according to general relativ- ity, was not solved until 1939 by a young American, Robert Oppenheimer. His result, however, suggested that there would be no observational consequences that could be detected by the telescopes of the day. Then the war intervened 
and Oppenheimer himself became closely involved in the atom bomb project. And after the war the problem of gravitational collapse was largely forgotten as most scientists were then interested in what happens on the scale of the atom and its nucleus. In the 1960s, however, interest in the large-scale prob- lems of astronomy and cosmology was revived by a great increase in the num- ber and range of astronomical observations brought about by the application of modern technology. Oppenheimer’s work was then rediscovered and extended by a number of people. 
The picture that we now have from Oppenheimer’s work is as follows: The gravitational field of the star changes the paths of light rays in space–time from what they would have been had the star not been present. The light cones, which indicate the paths followed in space and time by flashes of light emit- ted from their tips, are bent slightly inward near the surface of the star. This can be seen in the bending of light from distant stars that is observed during an eclipse of the sun. As the star contracts, the gravitational field at its surface gets stronger and the light cones get bent inward more. This makes it more difficult for light from the star to escape, and the light appears dimmer and redder to an observer at a distance. 
Eventually, when the star has shrunk to a certain critical radius, the gravita- tional field at the surface becomes so strong that the light cones are bent 

inward so much that the light can no longer escape. According to the theory of relativity, nothing can travel faster than light. Thus, if light cannot escape, neither can anything else. Everything is dragged back by the gravitational field. So one has a set of events, a region of space–time, from which it is not possible to escape to reach a distant observer. This region is what we now call a black hole. Its boundary is called the event horizon. It coincides with the paths of the light rays that just fail to escape from the black hole. 
In order to understand what you would see if you were watching a star collapse to form a black hole, one has to remember that in the theory of relativity there is no absolute time. Each observer has his own measure of time. The time for someone on a star will be different from that for someone at a distance, because of the gravitational field of the star. This effect has been measured in an exper- iment on Earth with clocks at the top and bottom of a water tower. Suppose an intrepid astronaut on the surface of the collapsing star sent a signal every second, according to his watch, to his spaceship orbiting about the star. At some time on his watch, say eleven o’clock, the star would shrink below the critical radius at which the gravitational field became so strong that the signals would no longer reach the spaceship. 
His companions watching from the spaceship would find the intervals between successive signals from the astronaut getting longer and longer as eleven 
BLACK HOLES 
o’clock approached. However, the effect would be very small before 10:59:59. They would have to wait only very slightly more than a second between the astronaut’s 10:59:58 signal and the one that he sent when his watch read 10:59:59, but they would have to wait forever for the eleven o’clock signal. The light waves emitted from the surface of the star between 10:59:59 and eleven o’clock, by the astronaut’s watch, would be spread out over an infinite period of time, as seen from the spaceship. 
The time interval between the arrival of successive waves at the spaceship would get longer and longer, and so the light from the star would appear redder and redder and fainter and fainter. Eventually the star would be so dim that it could no longer be seen from the spaceship. All that would be left would be a black hole in space. The star would, however, continue to exert the same gravitational force on the spaceship. This is because the star is still visible to the spaceship, at least in principle. It is just that the light from the surface is so red-shifted by the gravitational field of the star that it cannot be seen. However, the red shift does not affect the gravitational field of the star itself. Thus, the spaceship would continue to orbit the black hole. 
The work that Roger Penrose and I did between 1965 and 1970 showed that, according to general relativity, there must be a singularity of infinite density within the black hole. This is rather like the big bang at the beginning of time, 

only it would be an end of time for the collapsing body and the astronaut. At the singularity, the laws of science and our ability to predict the future would break down. However, any observer who remained outside the black hole would not be affected by this failure of predictability, because neither light nor any other signal can reach them from the singularity. 
This remarkable fact led Roger Penrose to propose the cosmic censorship hypothesis, which might be paraphrased as “God abhors a naked singularity.” In other words, the singularities produced by gravitational collapse occur only in places like black holes, where they are decently hidden from outside view by an event horizon. Strictly, this is what is known as the weak cosmic censor- ship hypothesis: protect obervers who remain outside the black hole from the consequences of the breakdown of predictability that occurs at the singularity. But it does nothing at all for the poor unfortunate astronaut who falls into the hole. Shouldn’t God protect his modesty as well? 
There are some solutions of the equations of general relativity in which it is possible for our astronaut to see a naked singularity. He may be able to avoid hitting the singularity and instead fall through a “worm hole” and come out in another region of the universe. This would offer great possibilities for travel in space and time, but unfortunately it seems that the solutions may all be high- ly unstable. The least disturbance, such as the presence of an astronaut, may 
change them so that the astronaut cannot see the singularity until he hits it and his time comes to an end. In other words, the singularity always lies in his future and never in his past. 
The strong version of the cosmic censorship hypothesis states that in a realis- tic solution, the singularities always lie either entirely in the future, like the singularities of gravitational collapse, or entirely in the past, like the big bang. It is greatly to be hoped that some version of the censorship hypothesis holds, because close to naked singularities it may be possible to travel into the past. While this would be fine for writers of science fiction, it would mean that no one's life would ever be safe. Someone might go into the past and kill your father or mother before you were conceived. 
In a gravitational collapse to form a black hole, the movements would be dammed by the emission of gravitational waves. One would therefore expect that it would not be too long before the black hole would settle down to a sta- tionary state. It was generally supposed that this final stationary state would depend on the details of the body that had collapsed to form the black hole. The black hole might have any shape or size, and its shape might not even be fixed, but instead be pulsating. 

However, in 1967, the study of black holes was revolutionized by a paper writ- ten in Dublin by Werner Israel. Israel showed that any black hole that is not rotating must be perfectly round or spherical. Its size, moreover, would depend only on its mass. It could, in fact, be described by a particular solution of Einstein’s equations that had been known since 1917, when it had been found by Karl Schwarzschild shortly after the discovery of general relativity. At first, Israel’s result was interpreted by many people, including Israel himself, as evi- dence that black holes would form only from the collapse of bodies that were perfectly round or spherical. As no real body would be perfectly spherical, this meant that, in general, gravitational collapse would lead to naked singularities. There was, however, a different interpretation of Israel’s result, which was advocated by Roger Penrose and John Wheeler in particular. This was that a black hole should behave like a ball of fluid. Although a body might start off in an unspherical state, as it collapsed to form a black hole it would settle down to a spherical state due to the emission of gravitational waves. Further calcu- lations supported this view and it came to be adopted generally. 
Israel’s result had dealt only with the case of black holes formed from nonro- tating bodies. On the analogy with a ball of fluid, one would expect that a black hole made by the collapse of a rotating body would not be perfectly round. It would have a bulge round the equator caused by the effect of the rota- tion. We observe a small bulge like this in the sun, caused by its rotation once 
every twenty-five days or so. In 1963, Roy Kerr, a New Zealander, had found a set of black–hole solutions of the equations of general relativity more general than the Schwarzschild solutions. These “Kerr” black holes rotate at a constant rate, their size and shape depending only on their mass and rate of rotation. If the rotation was zero, the black hole was perfectly round and the solution was identical to the Schwarzschild solution. But if the rotation was nonzero, the black hole bulged outward near its equator. It was therefore nat- ural to conjecture that a rotating body collapsing to form a black hole would end up in a state described by the Kerr solution. 
In 1970, a colleague and fellow research student of mine, Brandon Carter, took the first step toward proving this conjecture. He showed that, provided a sta- tionary rotating black hole had an axis of symmetry, like a spinning top, its size and shape would depend only on its mass and rate of rotation. Then, in 1971, I proved that any stationary rotating black hole would indeed have such an axis of symmetry. Finally, in 1973, David Robinson at Kings College, London, used Carter’s and my results to show that the conjecture had been correct: Such a black hole had indeed to be the Kerr solution. 
So after gravitational collapse a black hole must settle down into a state in which it could be rotating, but not pulsating. Moreover, its size and shape would depend only on its mass and rate of rotation, and not on the nature of 

the body that had collapsed to form it. This result became known by the maxim “A black hole has no hair.” It means that a very large amount of infor- mation about the body that has collapsed must be lost when a black hole is formed, because afterward all we can possibly measure about the body is its mass and rate of rotation. The significance of this will be seen in the next lec- ture. The no-hair theorem is also of great practical importance because it so greatly restricts the possible types of black holes. One can therefore make detailed models of objects that might contain black holes, and compare the predictions of the models with observations. 
Black holes are one of only a fairly small number of cases in the history of sci- ence where a theory was developed in great detail as a mathematical model before there was any evidence from observations that it was correct. Indeed, this used to be the main argument of opponents of black holes. How could one believe in objects for which the only evidence was calculations based on the dubious theory of general relativity? 
In 1963, however, Maarten Schmidt, an astronomer at the Mount Palomar Observatory in California, found a faint, starlike object in the direction of the source of radio waves called 3C273—that is, source number 273 in the third Cambridge catalog of radio sources. When he measured the red shift of the object, he found it was too large to be caused by a gravitational field: If it had 
been a gravitational red shift, the object would have to be so massive and so near to us that it would disturb the orbits of planets in the solar system. This suggested that the red shift was instead caused by the expansion of the uni- verse, which in turn meant that the object was a very long way away. And to be visible at such a great distance, the object must be very bright and must be emitting a huge amount of energy. 
The only mechanism people could think of that would produce such large quantities of energy seemed to be the gravitational collapse not just of a star but of the whole central region of a galaxy. A number of other similar “quasi- stellar objects,” or quasars, have since been discovered, all with large red shifts. But they are all too far away, and too difficult, to observe to provide conclu- sive evidence of black holes. 
Further encouragement for the existence of black holes came in 1967 with the discovery by a research student at Cambridge, Jocelyn Bell, of some objects in the sky that were emitting regular pulses of radio waves. At first, Jocelyn and her supervisor, Anthony Hewish, thought that maybe they had made contact with an alien civilization in the galaxy. Indeed, at the seminar at which they announced their discovery, I remember that they called the first four sources to be found LGM 1–4, LGM standing for “Little Green Men.” 
In the end, however, they and everyone else came to the less romantic conclu- sion that these objects, which were given the name pulsars, were in fact just rotating neutron stars. They were emitting pulses of radio waves because of a complicated indirection between their magnetic fields and surrounding matter. This was bad news for writers of space westerns, but very hopeful for the small number of us who believed in black holes at that time. It was the first positive evidence that neutron stars existed. A neutron star has a radius of about ten miles, only a few times the critical radius at which a star becomes a black hole. If a star could collapse to such a small size, it was not unreasonable to expect that other stars could collapse to even smaller size and become black holes. 
How could we hope to detect a black hole, as by its very definition it does not emit any light? It might seem a bit like looking for a black cat in a coal cellar. Fortunately, there is a way, since as John Michell pointed out in his pioneer- ing paper in 1783, a black hole still exerts a gravitational force on nearby objects. Astronomers have observed a number of systems in which two stars orbit around each other, attracted toward each other by gravity. They also observed systems in which there is only one visible star that is orbiting around some unseen companion. 
One cannot, of course, immediately conclude that the companion is a black hole. It might merely be a star that is too faint to be seen. However, some of 
these systems, like the one called Cygnus X-I, are also strong sources of X rays. The best explanation for this phenomenon is that the X rays are generated by matter that has been blown off the surface of the visible star. As it falls toward the unseen companion, it develops a spiral motion—rather like water running out of a bath—and it gets very hot, emitting X rays. For this mechanism to work, the unseen object has to be very small, like a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole. 
Now, from the observed motion of the visible star, one can determine the low- est possible mass of the unseen object. In the case of Cygnus X-I, this is about six times the mass of the sun. According to Chandrasekhar’s result, this is too much for the unseen object to be a white dwarf. It is also too large a mass to be a neutron star. It seems, therefore, that it must be a black hole. 
There are other models to explain Cygnus X–I that do not include a black hole, but they are all rather far-fetched. A black hole seems to be the only really natural explanation of the observations. Despite this, I have a bet with Kip Thorne of the California Institute of Technology that in fact Cygnus X–I does not contain a black hole. This is a form of insurance policy for me. I have done a lot of work on black holes, and it would all be wasted if it turned out that black holes do not exist. But in that case, I would have the consolation of winning my bet, which would bring me four years of the magazine Private Eye. 
If black holes do exist, Kip will get only one year of Penthouse, because when we made the bet in 1975, we were 80 percent certain that Cygnus was a black hole. By now I would say that we are about 95 percent certain, but the bet has yet to be settled. 
There is evidence for black holes in a number of other systems in our galaxy, and for much larger black holes at the centers of other galaxies and quasars. One can also consider the possibility that there might be black holes with masses much less than that of the sun. Such black holes could not be formed by gravitational collapse, because their masses are below the Chandrasekhar mass limit. Stars of this low mass can support themselves against the force of gravity even when they have exhausted their nuclear fuel. So, low-mass black holes could form only if matter were compressed to enormous densities by very large external pressures. Such conditions could occur in a very big hydrogen bomb. The physicist John Wheeler once calculated that if one took all the heavy water in all the oceans of the world, one could build a hydrogen bomb that would compress matter at the center so much that a black hole would be created. Unfortunately, however, there would be no one left to observe it. 
A more practical possibility is that such low–mass black holes might have been formed in the high temperatures and pressures of the very early universe. Black holes could have been formed if the early universe had not been perfectly 
smooth and uniform, because then a small region that was denser than aver- age could be compressed in this way to form a black hole. But we know that there must have been some irregularities, because otherwise the matter in the universe would still be perfectly uniformly distributed at the present epoch, instead of being clumped together in stars and galaxies. 
Whether or not the irregularities required to account for stars and galaxies would have led to the formation of a significant number of these primordial black holes depends on the details of the conditions in the early universe. So if we could determine how many primordial black holes there are now, we would learn a lot about the very early stages of the universe. Primordial black holes with masses more than a thousand million tons—the mass of a large mountain—could be detected only by their gravitational influence on other visible matter or on the expansion of the universe. However, as we shall learn in the next lecture, black holes are not really black after all: They glow like a hot body, and the smaller they are, the more they glow. So, paradoxi- cally, smaller black holes might actually turn out to be easier to detect than large ones. 

Before the question 1970, my of research whether on there general had relativity been a big had bang concentrated singularity. mainly However, on 
one evening in November of that year, shortly after the birth of my daughter, Lucy, I started to think about black holes as I was getting into bed. My disabil- ity made this rather a slow process, so I had plenty of time. At that date there was no precise definition of which points in space-time lay inside a black hole and which lay outside. 
I had already discussed with Roger Penrose the idea of defining a black hole as the set of events from which it was not possible to escape to a large distance. This is now the generally accepted definition. It means that the boundary of the black hole, the event horizon, is formed by rays of light that just fail to get away from the black hole. Instead, they stay forever, hovering on the edge of the black hole. It is like running away from the police and managing to keep one step ahead but not being able to get clear away. 
Suddenly I realized that the paths of these light rays could not be approaching one another, because if they were, they must eventually run into each other. It would be like someone else running away from the police in the opposite direc- tion. You would both be caught or, in this case, fall into a black hole. But if these light rays were swallowed up by the black hole, then they could not have 
been on the boundary of the black hole. So light rays in the event horizon had to be moving parallel to, or away from, each other. 
Another way of seeing this is that the event horizon, the boundary of the black hole, is like the edge of a shadow. It is the edge of the light of escape to a great distance, but, equally, it is the edge of the shadow of impending doom. And if you look at the shadow cast by a source at a great distance, such as the sun, you will see that the rays of light on the edge are not approaching each other. If the rays of light that form the event horizon, the boundary of the black hole, can never approach each other, the area of the event horizon could stay the same or increase with time. It could never decrease, because that would mean that at least some of the rays of light in the boundary would have to be approaching each other. In fact, the area would increase whenever matter or radiation fell into the black hole. 
Also, suppose two black holes collided and merged together to form a single black hole. Then the area of the event horizon of the final black hole would be greater than the sum of the areas of the event horizons of the original black holes. This nondecreasing property of the event horizon’s area placed an important restriction on the possible behavior of black holes. I was so excited with my discovery that I did not get much sleep that night. 
The next day I rang up Roger Penrose. He agreed with me. I think, in fact, that he had been aware of this property of the area. However, he had been using a slightly different definition of a black hole. He had not realized that the boundaries of the black hole according to the two definitions would be the same, provided the black hole had settled down to a stationary state. 
The nondecreasing behavior of a black hole’s area was very reminiscent of the behavior of a physical quantity called entropy, which measures the degree of disorder of a system. It is a matter of common experience that disorder will tend to increase if things are left to themselves; one has only to leave a house without repairs to see that. One can create order out of disorder—for example, one can paint the house. However, that requires expenditure of energy, and so decreases the amount of ordered energy available. 
A precise statement of this idea is known as the second law of thermodynam- ics. It states that the entropy of an isolated system never decreases with time. Moreover, when two systems are joined together, the entropy of the combined system is greater than the sum of the entropies of the individual systems. For example, consider a system of gas molecules in a box. The molecules can be 

thought of as little billiard balls continually colliding with each other and bouncing off the walls of the box. Suppose that initially the molecules are all confined to the left-hand side of the box by a partition. If the partition is then removed, the molecules will tend to spread out and occupy both halves of the box. At some later time they could, by chance, all be in the right half or all be back in the left half. However, it is overwhelmingly more probable that there will be roughly equal numbers in the two halves. Such a state is less ordered, or more disordered, than the original state in which all the molecules were in one half. One therefore says that the entropy of the gas has gone up. 
Similarly, suppose one starts with two boxes, one containing oxygen molecules and the other containing nitrogen molecules. If one joins the boxes together and removes the intervening wall, the oxygen and the nitrogen molecules will start to mix. At a later time, the most probable state would be to have a thoroughly uniform mixture of oxygen and nitrogen molecules throughout the two boxes. This state would be less ordered, and hence have more entropy, than the initial state of two separate boxes. 
The second law of thermodynamics has a rather different status than that of other laws of science. Other laws, such as Newton’s law of gravity, for example, are absolute law—that is, they always hold. On the other hand, the second law is a statistical law—that is, it does not hold always, just in the vast 
majority of cases. The probability of all the gas molecules in our box being found in one half of the box at a later time is many millions of millions to one, but it could happen. 
However, if one has a black hole around, there seems to be a rather easier way of violating the second law: Just throw some matter with a lot of entropy, such as a box of gas, down the black hole. The total entropy of matter outside the black hole would go down. One could, of course, still say that the total entropy, including the entropy inside the black hole, has not gone down. But since there is no way to look inside the black hole, we cannot see how much entropy the matter inside it has. It would be nice, therefore, if there was some feature of the black hole by which observers outside the black hole could tell its entropy; this should increase whenever matter carrying entropy fell into the black hole. 
Following my discovery that the area of the event horizon increased whenever matter fell into a black hole, a research student at Princeton named Jacob Bekenstein suggested that the area of the event horizon was a measure of the entropy of the black hole. As matter carrying entropy fell into the black hole, the area of the event horizon would go up, so that the sum of the entropy of matter outside black holes and the area of the horizons would never go down. 

This suggestion seemed to prevent the second law of thermodynamics from being violated in most situations. However, there was one fatal flaw: If a black hole has entropy, then it ought also to have a temperature. But a body with a nonzero temperature must emit radiation at a certain rate. It is a matter of common experience that if one heats up a poker in the fire, it glows red hot and emits radiation. However, bodies at lower temperatures emit radiation, too; one just does not normally notice it because the amount is fairly small. This radiation is required in order to prevent violations of the second law. So black holes ought to emit radiation, but by their very definition, black holes are objects that are not supposed to emit anything. It therefore seemed that the area of the event horizon of a black hole could not be regarded as its entropy. 
In fact, in 1972 I wrote a paper on this subject with Brandon Carter and an American colleague, Jim Bardeen. We pointed out that, although there were many similarities between entropy and the area of the event horizon, there was this apparently fatal difficulty. I must admit that in writing this paper I was motivated partly by irritation with Bekenstein, because I felt he had misused my discovery of the increase of the area of the event horizon. However, it turned out in the end that he was basically correct, though in a manner he had certainly not expected. 
In September 1973, while I was visiting Moscow, I discussed black holes with two leading Soviet experts, Yakov Zeldovich and Alexander Starobinsky. They convinced me that, according to the quantum mechanical uncertainty princi- ple, rotating black holes should create and emit particles. I believed their argu- ments on physical grounds, but I did not like the mathematical way in which they calculated the emission. I therefore set about devising a better mathemat- ical treatment, which I described at an informal seminar in Oxford at the end of November 1973. At that time I had not done the calculations to find out how much would actually be emitted. I was expecting to discover just the radi- ation that Zeldovich and Starobinsky had predicted from rotating black holes. However, when I did the calculation, I found, to my surprise and annoyance, that even nonrotating black holes should apparently create and emit particles at a steady rate. 
At first I thought that this emission indicated that one of the approximations I had used was not valid. I was afraid if Bekenstein found out about it, he would use it as a further argument to support his ideas about the entropy of black holes, which I still did not like. However, the more I thought about it, the more it seemed that the approximations really ought to hold. But what finally convinced me that the emission was real was that the spectrum of the emitted particles was exactly that which would be emitted by a hot body. 

The black hole was emitting particles at exactly the correct rate to prevent violations of the second law. 
Since then, the calculations have been repeated in a number of different forms by other people. They all confirm that a black hole ought to emit particles and radiation as if it were a hot body with a temperature that depends only on the black hole’s mass: the higher the mass, the lower the temperature. One can understand this emission in the following way: What we think of as empty space cannot be completely empty because that would mean that all the fields, such as the gravitational field and the electromagnetic field, would have to be exactly zero. However, the value of a field and its rate of change with time are like the position and velocity of a particle. The uncertainty principle implies that the more accurately one knows one of these quantities, the less accurately one can know the other. 
So in empty space the field cannot be fixed at exactly zero, because then it would have both a precise value, zero, and a precise rate of change, also zero. Instead, there must be a certain minimum amount of uncertainty, or quantum fluctuations, in the value of a field. One can think of these fluctuations as pairs of particles of light or gravity that appear together at some time, move apart, and then come together again and annihilate each other. These particles are called virtual particles. Unlike real particles, they cannot be observed directly 
with a particle detector. However, their indirect effects, such as small changes in the energy of electron orbits and atoms, can be measured and agree with the theoretical predictions to a remarkable degree of accuracy. 
By conservation of energy, one of the partners in a virtual particle pair will have positive energy and the other partner will have negative energy. The one with negative energy is condemned to be a short-lived virtual particle. This is because real particles always have positive energy in normal situations. It must therefore seek out its partner and annihilate it. However, the gravitational field inside a black hole is so strong that even a real particle can have negative energy there. 
It is therefore possible, if a black hole is present, for the virtual particle with negative energy to fall into the black hole and become a real particle. In this case it no longer has to annihilate its partner; its forsaken partner may fall into the black hole as well. But because it has positive energy, it is also possible for it to escape to infinity as a real particle. To an observer at a distance, it will appear to have been emitted from the black hole. The smaller the black hole, the less far the particle with negative energy will have to go before it becomes a real particle. Thus, the rate of emission will be greater, and the apparent tem- perature of the black hole will be higher. 

The positive energy of the outgoing radiation would be balanced by a flow of negative energy particles into the black hole. By Einstein's famous equation E = mc2, energy is equivalent to mass. A flow of negative energy into the black hole therefore reduces its mass. As the black hole loses mass, the area of its event horizon gets smaller, but this decrease in the entropy of the black hole is more than compensated for by the entropy of the emitted radiation, so the second law is never violated. 
The lower the mass of the black hole, the higher its temperature is. So as the black hole loses mass, its temperature and rate of emission increase. It there- fore loses mass more quickly. What happens when the mass of the black hole eventually becomes extremely small is not quite clear. The most reasonable guess is that it would disappear completely in a tremendous final burst of emis- sion, equivalent to the explosion of millions of H-bombs. 
A black hole with a mass a few times that of the sun would have a tempera- ture of only one ten-millionth of a degree above absolute zero. This is much less than the temperature of the microwave radiation that fills the universe, about 2.7 degrees above absolute zero—so such black holes would give off less than they absorb, though even that would be very little. If the universe is des- 
tined to go on expanding forever, the temperature of the microwave radiation will eventually decrease to less than that of such a black hole. The hole will then absorb less than it emits and will begin to lose mass. But, even then, its temperature is so low that it would take about 1066years to evaporate completely. This is much longer than the age of the universe, which is only about 1010 years. 
On the other hand, as we learned in the last lecture, there might be primor- dial black holes with a very much smaller mass that were made by the collapse of irregularities in the very early stages of the universe. Such black holes would have a much higher temperature and would be emitting radiation at a much greater rate. A primordial black hole with an initial mass of a thousand mil- lion tons would have a lifetime roughly equal to the age of the universe. Primordial black holes with initial masses less than this figure would already have completely evaporated. However, those with slightly greater masses would still be emitting radiation in the form of X rays and gamma rays. These are like waves of light, but with a much shorter wavelength. Such holes hardly deserve the epithet black. They really are white hot, and are emitting energy at the rate of about ten thousand megawatts. 
One such black hole could run ten large power stations, if only we could har- ness its output. This would be rather difficult, however. The black hole would 

have the mass of a mountain compressed into the size of the nucleus of an atom. If you had one of these black holes on the surface of the Earth, there would be no way to stop it falling through the floor to the center of the Earth. It would oscillate through the Earth and back, until eventually it settled down at the center. So the only place to put such a black hole, in which one might use the energy that it emitted, would be in orbit around the Earth. And the only way that one could get it to orbit the Earth would be to attract it there by towing a large mass in front of it, rather like a carrot in front of a donkey. This does not sound like a very practical proposition, at least not in the immediate future.THE SEARCH FOR PRIMORDIAL BLACK HOLES 
But even if we cannot harness the emission from these primordial black holes, what are our chances of observing them? We could look for the gamma rays that the primordial black holes emit during most of their lifetime. Although the radiation from most would be very weak because they are far away, the total from all of them might be detectable. We do, indeed, observe such a background of gamma rays. However, this background was probably generated by processes other than primordial black holes. One can say that the observa- tions of the gamma ray background do not provide any positive evidence for 
primordial black holes. But they tell us that, on average, there cannot be more than three hundred little black holes in every cubic light-year in the universe. This limit means that primordial black holes could make up at most one mil- lionth of the average mass density in the universe. 
With primordial black holes being so scarce, it might seem unlikely that there would be one that was near enough for us to observe on its own. But since gravity would draw primordial black holes toward any matter, they should be much more common in galaxies. If they were, say, a million times more com- mon in galaxies, then the nearest black hole to us would probably be at a distance of about a thousand million kilometers, or about as far as Pluto, the farthest known planet. At this distance it would still be very difficult to detect the steady emission of a black hole even if it was ten thousand megawatts. 
In order to observe a primordial black hole, one would have to detect several gamma ray quanta coming from the same direction within a reasonable space of time, such as a week. 
Otherwise, they might simply be part of the background. But Planck’s quan- tum principle tells us that each gamma ray quantum has a very high energy, because gamma rays have a very high frequency. So to radiate even ten thou- sand megawatts would not take many quanta. And to observe these few quan- 

ta coming from the distance of Pluto would require a larger gamma ray detec- tor than any that have been constructed so far. Moreover, the detector would have to be in space, because gamma rays cannot penetrate the atmosphere. 
Of course, if a black hole as close as Pluto were to reach the end of its life and blow up, it would be easy to detect the final burst of emission. But if the black hole has been emitting for the last ten or twenty thousand million years, the chances of it reaching the end of its life within the next few years are really rather small. It might equally well be a few million years in the past or future. So in order to have a reasonable chance of seeing an explosion before your research grant ran out, you would have to find a way to detect any explosions within a distance of about one light-year. You would still have the problem of needing a large gamma ray detector to observe several gamma ray quanta from the explosion. However, in this case, it would not be necessary to determine that all the quanta came from the same direction. It would be enough to observe that they all arrived within a very short time interval to be reasonably confident that they were coming from the same burst. 
One gamma ray detector that might be capable of spotting primordial black holes is the entire Earth’s atmosphere. (We are, in any case, unlikely to be able to build a larger detector.) When a high-energy gamma ray quantum hits the atoms in our atmosphere, it creates pairs of electrons and positrons. When 
these hit other atoms, they in turn create more pairs of electrons and positrons. So one gets what is called an electron shower. The result is a form of light called Cerenkov radiation. One can therefore detect gamma ray bursts by looking for flashes of light in the night sky. 
Of course, there are a number of other phenomena, such as lightning, which can also give flashes in the sky. However, one could distinguish gamma ray bursts from such effects by observing flashes simultaneously at two or more thoroughly widely separated locations. A search like this has been carried out by two scientists from Dublin, Neil Porter and Trevor Weekes, using telescopes in Arizona. They found a number of flashes but none that could be definitely ascribed to gamma ray bursts from primordial black holes. 
Even if the search for primordial black holes proves negative, as it seems it may, it will still give us important information about the very early stages of the universe. If the early universe had been chaotic or irregular, or if the pres- sure of matter had been low, one would have expected it to produce many more primordial black holes than the limit set by our observations of the gamma ray background. It is only if the early universe was very smooth and uniform, and with a high pressure, that one can explain the absence of observable numbers of primordial black holes. 

Radiation from black holes was the first example of a prediction that depend- ed on both of the great theories of this century, general relativity and quantum mechanics. It aroused a lot of opposition initially because it upset the existing viewpoint: “How can a black hole emit anything?” When I first announced the results of my calculations at a conference at the Rutherford Laboratory near Oxford, I was greeted with general incredulity. At the end of my talk the chair- man of the session, John G. Taylor from Kings College, London, claimed it was all nonsense. He even wrote a paper to that effect. 
However, in the end most people, including John Taylor, have come to the conclusion that black holes must radiate like hot bodies if our other ideas about general relativity and quantum mechanics are correct. Thus even though we have not yet managed to find a primordial black hole, there is fairly general agreement that if we did, it would have to be emitting a lot of gamma and X rays. If we do find one, I will get the Nobel Prize. 
The existence of radiation from black holes seems to imply that gravitational collapse is not as final and irreversible as we once thought. If an astronaut falls into a black hole, its mass will increase. Eventually, the energy equivalent of 
that extra mass will be returned to the universe in the form of radiation. Thus, in a sense, the astronaut will be recycled. It would be a poor sort of immortal- ity, however, because any personal concept of time for the astronaut would almost certainly come to an end as he was crushed out of existence inside the black hole. Even the types of particle that were eventually emitted by the black hole would in general be different from those that made up the astro- naut. The only feature of the astronaut that would survive would be his mass or energy. 
The approximations I used to derive the emission from black holes should work well when the black hole has a mass greater than a fraction of a gram. However, they will break down at the end of the black hole's life, when its mass gets very small. The most likely outcome seems to be that the black hole would just disappear, at least from our region of the universe. It would take with it the astronaut and any singularity there might be inside the black hole. This was the first indication that quantum mechanics might remove the sin- gularities that were predicted by classical general relativity. However, the methods that I and other people were using in 1974 to study the quantum effects of gravity were not able to answer questions such as whether singulari- ties would occur in quantum gravity. 

From 1975 onward, I therefore started to develop a more powerful approach to quantum gravity based on Feynman’s idea of a sum over histories. The answers that this approach suggests for the origin and fate of the universe will be described in the next two lectures. We shall see that quantum mechanics allows the universe to have a beginning that is not a singularity. This means that the laws of physics need not break down at the origin of the universe. The state of the universe and its contents, like ourselves, are completely deter- mined by the laws of physics, up to the limit set by the uncertainty principle. So much for free will. 
